all right here we go three boom and
we're live how are you sir
I'm fine pretty good thank you for doing
this I appreciate it
that's fine my pleasure who roped you
into this I think I suppose James Tague
probably I I'm a big fan of your work
I've read much of your work I've seen
many of your interviews and videos
online and one of the things that I
really wanted to talk to you about I
find quite interesting is consciousness
and your belief that consciousness is
not simply calculation but that there's
something more to it and what what you
think this more could possibly be from a
scientific perspective which is unusual
because a lot of people have some
theories about consciousness but they're
usually crazy people like myself well I
mean we're all conscious and so we may
have theories about it yeah but no the
ideas came by somewhat roundabout route
I I went to Cambridge do graduate work
it was mathematics I was working on pure
mathematical subject algebraic geometry
but I thought you know we got three
years or spend some of the time going to
other talks that might be interesting so
I went to three talks particularly which
had a big influence on me
one was a talk by Hermann Bondi was a
general relativity cosmology wonderful
talk with very sort of animated
presentation II had and then there was a
talk by Paul Dirac one of the founders
of quantum mechanics and his talk well
his complete wonderful talk to wonderful
lectures as well but in a completely
different style he was very quiet and
precise and what he said and everything
and we in the very first lecture he was
talking about the superposition
principle in quantum mechanics so if you
have a particle and it could be in one
spot or it could be in another spot then
you have all sorts of states where it
can be in both places at once I mean
that's sort of strange but you've got to
get used to that idea and he Illustrated
with his piece a piece of chalk and I
think he broke it in two
to illustrate it could be in one spot or
in the other and my mind sort of
wandered at that point I don't know what
I was thinking about but I wasn't
concentrating and a few minutes later
he'd finished his description his
explanation and I had some vague memory
of something about energy but I didn't
understand what he said and I'd been
totally mystified by this ever since so
I suppose if I had heard what he said he
would have said something to calm me
down and and I sort of accept it in one
way or another but as it was it seemed
to me this was a major issue how on
earth do you have things that don't
behave according to what wander mechanic
says like cricket balls and baseballs
and things like that
anyway that's two of the talks the other
course was a course by a man called
Steen who talked on mathematical logic
and he explained things like girdle's
theorem and Turing machines Turing
machines being the mathematical notion
upon which modern computers are base for
all computers basically and the thing
about girdle's theorem you see I heard I
used to have a colleague when I was that
undergraduate in first of all who was
who became a scientist later on and we
talked about logic and you know how you
could make these kind of mathematical
systems which worked out logic and I'd
heard about this girl's theorem which
seemed to say that there were things in
mathematics that you just couldn't prove
and I didn't like that idea but I when I
heard the when I went to this course
weisstein and he explained what it
really says and what it says I suppose
you've got a method of proving things in
mathematics and when I say things I mean
things with numbers the one famous
example is there must Last Theorem
there's the Goldbach conjecture which
isn't yet proved that every even number
bigger than two is the sum of two prime
numbers that's the sort of example is
the thing it's just sort of mathematical
things about numbers which you can see
what they mean but it may be very
difficult to see whether it's true or
untrue but the idea often is in
mathematics you've got a system of
methods of proof and the key thing about
these methods of proof is that you can
have a computer check whether you've
done it right
so you these rules you know they could
be adding a and B it's the same as B and
a and things like that and you if you
give your you say to the computer say
here's a theorem like Goldbach
conjecture and you see whether it can be
proved and you say maybe I got a proof
and this follows these steps
and you give it to the computer and it
says yep you've done it right it's true
or maybe it will say you've done it
right and it's not true or it may not
say anything but just go on forever but
these are the sort of outcomes and the
point about it is that if you believe
that these procedures do give you a
proof in other words that if the
algorithm says yeah it's true then you
believe it it is true because you've
understood all the rules you looked at
the first one say yeah yeah that's okay
you little the second one said ma'am
oh yeah I see okay that's great and you
go all the way down and as long as
you're convinced all those rules work
then if it says yes that's something you
believe okay now what girl shows as he
constructs a very specific sentence a
statement which is a number thing like
likely there must last theorem or
something the thing about numbers which
what he shows is if you trust this
algorithm for proving mathematical
things then you can see by the way it's
constructed that it's true but you can
also see by the way it's constructed
that it cannot be proved by this
procedure now this was amazing to me
because
it tells me that okay you cannot
formalize your understanding in a scheme
which you could put on a computer that
you see this statement which girl comes
up with is something you can see on the
basis of the same understanding that
allows you to trust the rules that it's
true but that it's not actually derive
about by the rules it you see it's true
by virtue of your belief in the rules
and this to me was amazing
and I thought golly you know what's
understanding what does it mean is it
something following rules this is an
algorithm well this more or less says
it's not an algorithm because whatever
it was there would be something that you
could still see is true even though you
don't get it through the algorithm that
you had in the first place so this was a
bit alot of subtleties about this to
which people argue about endlessly but
it was pretty convincing to me that this
shows that we don't think when we
understand something that what's going
on in our heads is not an algorithm it's
not following rules it's something else
it's something that requires our
conscious appreciation of what we're
thinking about I'm thinking is a
conscious thing and understanding is a
conscious activity so I form the view
that conscious activities whatever they
are not just that kind of thing but you
know playing music or we were falling in
love or whatever these things might be
aren't not computations there's
something else going on and then I
thought because I you know I'm like to
think myself as a scientist and I think
that what's going in on our heads is
according to the laws of physics and
these laws of physics pretty good they
seem to work well in outside world and
so I believe that the laws that work in
our heads are the same as those laws so
I began to think about it well what
about Newton's mechanics well you could
put that on a computer what about
Einstein's special relativity you could
do that what about Mack
was wonderful equations which tell you
how the electricity and magnetism
operate and light and radio waves and
all these things that so follows this
beautiful set of equations that max were
produced you can put that on a computer
okay you may have to worry about
approximations and the least depend on
continuous numbers rather discrete
things but I didn't think that's the
answer then I thought what about general
relativity Einstein's theory of gravity
with curved space and all that
well we're familiar now with LIGO this
detector which is detected black holes
spiraling into each other from distant
galaxies and how do we know that those
signals are black holes but well because
of calculations people have put this
thing on an algorithm and you know what
those signals look like so Einstein's
general relativity sure you can put that
in a common of computer what about
quantum mechanics well there's the
famous equation of Schrodinger which
tells you how a quantum state evolves
you could put that on a computer too
it's difficult in many ways there's many
more parameters you were to worry about
but it's just as computable as these
other things well you see I then
remembered Eric's lecture you see and
how it is that these things that work in
the quantum world don't seem to work at
the level of classical big things and it
all depends on this process of what's
called measurements in quantum mechanics
and the measurement process is something
you learn how to do but it's not the
Schrodinger equation it's something else
and Schrodinger himself was very
intrigued by this facts that his own
equation gives you nonsense and you the
famous Schrodinger's cat where he
produces a situation in which the cat
would be dead and alive at the same time
he produced that an example simply to
demonstrate that roughly speaking his
equation gives you nonsense under these
circumstances so there's something else
and something else goes beyond our
current quantum mechanics and it tells
you what happens when the quantum state
makes a decision between but it doesn't
follow the
requested one thing or the other no
everybody knows that who does quantum
mechanics but they think oh it's what's
called making a measurement and you're
larger to something different but that
didn't make sense to me and so I had the
view that okay there is a big gap in our
understanding and if there is something
in the world which isn't something you
could put on a computer that's where it
is so the view I've held that for a long
time and that there's something non
computable something beyond computation
involved in our understandings of things
so that's a view of Health for ages I
didn't do much with it I just held the
view until I think there was a radio
talk between Marvin Minsky and edward
fredkin and they were explaining about
what computers can do and they were
talking about okay you have a computer
two computers talking to each other over
there and you walk up to the room and
the time you've walked up the room to
the computers they have computed
commuted communicated with each other
more thoughts than the human race ever
has done you see and I thought well I
see where you're coming from but I don't
think that's what's happening in human
communication human understanding is
something different from what computers
do and consciousness is the key thing
consciousness is something different
from computation so I've held that view
but then when I heard this stop by
Minsky and in fredkin I thought well I
had ideas of writing a book sometime you
know a long time in the future when I'm
retired this was some while back I say
and I thought well maybe this gives you
the focus and so I wrote this book
called the emperor's new mind which was
supposed to be saying well you know we
everybody seems to be thinking one thing
but yeah little kid notices it let the
Emperor it doesn't have any clothes so
it was the that theme of that story
which was the basis of the book so I say
okay maybe a lots of people think that
what we're doing is computing but if you
stand back and you say well no there's
something else going on
so that was the basis of my thoughts
about consciousness but I wrote this
book thinking that by the time I got to
the end of the book you see it was it
was a lot mostly about physics and
mathematics and things like that but I
was really aiming for this thing about
what's going on and conscious thinking
and I thought well I'll learn a bit
about neurophysiology and so on and by
the time I get to the end of the book
know pretty well what it could be I
didn't know it's the end of a book and I
just sort of tapered off rather with
something a little bit unbelievable and
that was the end now you see I'd hoped
that this book would stimulate young
people to get interested in science and
that sort of thing that mathematics oh
that was fine and when the book was
published I didn't get letters from
young kids I got letters from old
retired people who the ones who had the
time to read my book okay well that was
a little disappointing but okay
I'm glad the old retired people liked my
book but the other thing was I got a
letter from Stuart Hameroff and this
letter said more or less I think you
don't appreciate that there's something
else going on not neurons I mean the
neurons I could see you couldn't isolate
the quantum effects and you get the
what's called environmental decoherence
would happen and you get no way of
keeping the quantum state to the level
that you need in this picture so I
realize didn't have it but Stuart
Hameroff pointed out to me these little
things called microtubules and he'd
built up a theory that microtubules were
absolutely fundamental to consciousness
he had his own reasons for believing
that I'd never heard of him at that time
but then I checked up you know I get
lots of letters from people who maybe
don't make sense sometimes the letters
and this one I thought well is this
another one I realized these
microtubules are there and they looked
like just the kind of thing that could
well be supporting the kind of level of
quantum mechanics up to a level where
you you could expect the the quantum
state sort of collapse that's the
terminology people using quantum
microtubules they are inside brain
neurons
and this is a recent discovery from
those only to be there actually in lots
of cells you see people often complain
oh they're in your liver too not just
your brain so why doesn't your liver
conscious and all that but this has to
do with the organization of them and the
nature of them the particular kind of
microtubules how they're arranged which
is different in the brain how does it
vary in the brain compared to other
cells I think one big difference other
not Stuart emphasizes is so much there
are two kinds of microtubules they're
the ones called a lattice and the B
lattice and the a lattice ones are the
very symmetrical ones they're tubes and
they look the same all the way around
they've got a very beautiful arrangement
of these proteins called tubulin and
they make a very nice arrangement which
is connected with Fibonacci numbers and
things like that so they look bit like
fur cones but they're all parallel
they're not they don't taper off but the
thing is in the brain I think most
microtubules are probably what are
called be lattice ones and they don't
have so much symmetry they've got a sort
of seemed on the one side and they're
very important in transporting some
substances around cells and so on and
microchip is all sorts of things they
don't just do what much Stewart and I
think they may be doing in the brain so
the idea is that in the brain they're
organized differently and the probably
the ones that are important of a lattice
once which is a very symmetrical ones
and for a long time people couldn't see
the difference and because they looked
very similar and they may well be the
ones that's happened to be in pyramidal
cells as a particular kind of cell so
you know one of the things interested in
me a lot is how it is that not all parts
of the brain are the same in this
respect you see you've got the cerebrum
this is the part at the top and you know
divided down the middle and that when
you see brains that's what you normally
see with the convolutions and in the
init but right underneath and at the
back there's a thing called the
cerebellum which more looks more like a
like a ball of wool or something and the
cerebellum and it may still be argument
about this but it seems to be that it's
completely unconscious
and it has comparable number of neurons
far more connections between neurons in
the cerebrum and it's what takes control
and maybe when you're driving your car
and you're thinking about something else
and you you don't you're not thinking
what you're doing because it's
unconscious and the unconscious control
you're not pianist who is very expert
and moves the fingers around and plays
it up with a little finger that pianist
doesn't think well I got to move that
muscle this way in this bone that way
and so on and it's it's all controlled
unconsciously and a lot of this
unconscious control is done somewhere
else in the cerebellum when you get
really skilled so it seemed to me okay
you've got different kinds of structures
different and it could well be that
these pyramidal cells which have a
particular organization of microtubules
are the ones that wear that
consciousness is really coming coming to
light mainly I don't know there's a lot
which is which is not known about this
controversial and all sorts of things
but the cerebellum seems to be different
and organized differently so it's not
just how many neurons how many
connections are there because there are
more in the cerebellum so it's not that
something else do they know this from
observing the brain through fMRI or
something like that during particular
activities like I don't know I would
imagine partly just examining it when
from dead people and looking at brains
and trying to estimate how many neurons
there are in it right but how would they
know what which part Parcells which is
conscious I I don't know that they do
know well I guess but the cut of the
cerebellum there is a bit of an argument
about that I thought whether it's
completely unconscious or not but it
seems that actions that that are carried
out by the cerebellum you don't know
aware what you're doing mmm but I mean
you know if you're the tennis player who
has to think very carefully about
whether we know which way to tilt the
ball no the control of what you're doing
so overall control is probably done with
the cerebrum but the cerebellum is
controlling the detailed motions how the
fingers move and all that kind of thing
and then you make sure that if you the
player thinks gonna hit the ball down
down the line there and then
the rest is done under the control of an
unconscious procedure I mean I may be
simplifying but I understand what you're
saying so you're saying that there's we
don't totally understand but we know
that there's different parts of the
brain that are responsible for different
activities and some activities don't
seem to be conscious yes yes I mean I
think it's probably the case nah maybe I
don't know I shouldn't make a statement
my don't really know but certainly there
are lots of different parts of the
cerebrum which may be which may be not
conscious to so I'm not saying that the
whole thing is capable of being
conscious since they seem to be
differences in different parts but are
you convinced that microtubules are
responsible for consciousness or it's a
primary theory I think they're the one
of the best candidates oh you see I
don't think it's only microchip I don't
know I'm not sure what Stuart Hameroff
sphere and this is he certainly thinks
the microchip was exceedingly important
in consciousness and I think he's right
that's the feeling and again and he's
done a lot of work on trying to find
what anaesthetic gas is just an
important one of the important ways you
can tell things about consciousness and
most of it you can't is just here saying
whatever it is but one of the important
ways you can tell something about
consciousness is what turns it off in a
reversible way in suus job is do you
know he's an anesthesiologist he puts
people to sleep well I think he would
complain if I say putting it to sleep
because under anesthetic is actually
different for sleep but you make them
unconscious in the reversible way you
want to make sure you think you can wake
them up again and it's obviously a very
skills thing but I guess a lot of his
colleagues might be skilled at doing it
but don't they ask the questions about
what they're actually doing from the
point of view of the biology and the
physics and so on so Stuart was really
interested in that question it's partly
I think the things like mitosis cell
division and he was very struck by the
way that the chromosomes or lyin' lyin'
up and that this is this microtubules
which
and they're really a big part in in in
the structure of cells and how they how
they behave and so on but why they are
consciousness well I guess it was an
experience with with putting people
under anesthetics and the fact that
their gases which put you to sleep and
there again I shouldn't say to sleep but
right but you're on the anesthetic very
unconnected chemically they different
kinds of things be yet they still seem
to have the same effect and to
understand what it is that they affect
is you know that's a lot of his interest
is to do with that so just by putting
someone unconscious and registering what
parts of the brain are no longer active
this is what they're using sort of
reverse engineer by turning those parts
on that's what enables consciousness is
this well I think it's probably
simplification but that's that's a good
first first step yes consciousness
becomes as a subject it's very it's it's
very susceptible to woo right indeed it
gets it's one of those weird ones where
people want to start talking about souls
and universal consciousness and they
start it gets yeah it's a murky area yes
and there's no clear borderline what
Suzy Stewart runs these consciousness
conferences and he's very broad-minded
he has people all sorts of different
views like the ones you mentioned and
it's not necessarily his view but he
likes to get a broad perspective on
what's going on I'm a bit more narrow
minded than he is on these matters yeah
I am too I'm very skeptical because I
just I understand the inclination that
people have to lean towards the whoo
then it's very fun yes it's for whatever
reason people are inclined to lean
towards Jefferson you saw that movie I
don't know if you saw what the bleep do
we know oh yes I did I love that kind of
stuff that was a little worrying to me a
little bit yes yes indeed now that did
worry me
well it's it's just you know was written
the movie was made by a cult leader and
you know it gets a little squirrely
right you're absolutely right uh yeah as
I was just thinking I'm sure you were a
lot of people that I know they were like
yourself we're worried yeah but it's
this is something that everyone
contemplates like what makes you
conscious what is the soul is it a real
thing what is what is your consciousness
is it simply just your own biology
trying to calculate your environment and
looking out for its best interest in
trying to procreate and move forward
with the the the genes that it has or is
it something almost mystical or far more
complicated maybe even instead of the
word mystical might be tainted man
something far more complex than we're
currently able to understand I think to
some extent I would agree it is because
it's certainly different I mean to have
some internal perception of the external
world and yeah think abstractly and all
these things it's surely different from
where baseball runs through the air and
what what makes it spin and and
different than every other conscious
animal I'm not so sure about that
so I think the difference isn't that big
well I mean okay we you know we use
language to a degree I mean some animals
use language to some kind of degree hmm
there's a huge difference in degree I'd
agree with that but whether it's a
difference in kind I'm not at all sure
you know you watched these nature movies
and I remember seeing one about
elephants and this was about how the
elephants were they were always they're
always led by a female elephant and
that's not relevant to the story but
they were trying to go from A to B I
don't know what it was and they're like
there's a whole herd of them they'll be
doing that but then at a certain point
they did made a detour and they went off
to a place where the leader of the
elephant herd her sister had died and
there the bones and the tusks I suppose
were their bones anyway we're there and
the elephant's picked them up handed
them around and and seemed to caress
them and move them around
and then they went back and joined to
the the roof that they were now what
does that tell us there's something
going on which is not just some machine
behaving yes like a robot there's some
some feelings there we can appreciate
I'm another one I remember was one with
these African hunting dogs and the dogs
you see there's a road where some
antelopes would tend to go and they're
to go across the river and when they got
to the point with the cross though it
might slow down and and make their way
to get across now these hunting dogs you
could see them I think it was taken from
the air and they would go along towards
this place where the river was and then
they would break into two so half of
them would go one way towards thick and
they were hide just where the river
starts and the other half but go and
chase the antelopes they've gone bark
and make an awful noise chase them right
there and then the other ones were
pounce on them I mean there's something
there which is you know that they've
been working it down between themselves
how to do is compute communication of
some kind yes and I think there is what
will you call understanding okay mmm at
a more primitive level and then human
understanding but nevertheless there is
something there's no sort of clean
dividing line in my view it's it's it's
pretty continuous yeah and this exists
in wolves as well so very very similar
behavior and they do seem to have not
just verbal but nonverbal communication
they seem to have some understanding of
what the task is uh-huh and what their
roles are in the task and even though
there's not as many variables maybe as
human life there definitely seems to be
a conscious awareness of first of all
their their position in the hierarchy of
the tribe yeah of the the background
things but also their what their
objective is is this is not a selfish
objective it's a group objective and
they operate as a group and they do move
like those African dogs you were talking
about yeah
no it's fascinating like that yeah and
there's a lot of indication that we're
certainly chimps and humans and things
and dolphins you we know about them but
ice imagine it goes
quite far down I should think how much
have you studied octopi they're
fascinating yeah
yes no I haven't there's a new book
about them which I haven't got the
chance to read yet I want to read it I
think they're they're highly intelligent
yes yes yeah I've been really paying
attention to them for a few years I'm a
good friend my friend Remy Warren was
doing a television show called
apex predator we studied the way
different animals hunted and he started
studying the way octopus and cuttlefish
and all these different yeah
the different octopi and what the way
they could adapt to their environment by
changing their actual not just to look
but the texture of their skin
instantaneously and how this is not
really understood how they not only how
they do it but how they know what
they're what's below them what they're
copying yes that they somehow or another
can figure out how to blend in almost
perfectly with their environment it's
amazing isn't it they also can open jars
and they cannot climb out of tanks there
was one guy had a he had a camera on his
tank because he had two tanks yes and
one of them had very expensive tropical
fish and the other one had his octopus
and he was trying to figure out what was
happening to his expensive tropical fish
so he put a camera on it and the octopus
was climbing out of the tank walking
across the ground climbing into the
other tank killing one of the fish
eating it and then going back into his
cave yes yeah that's heavy
well there's one I saw about I think I
heard the description or I read it I
think I read it about there were some
experiments on testing the intelligence
of octopuses oh and they had a little
thing they had to pull a chain and then
open a door and get food out and this
octopus was thinking that I'm gonna fed
up with this thing and so yank the chain
it came right off and then it rose to
the top and started squirting all the
people in their white coats I know it
was pretty good do you know there's
something else going on than just there
is something going on absolutely now
when you if you weren't pressed for to
figure this out and some sort of a
a paper that you had to display in front
of scientists if you were you were like
you're trying to figure out like what do
you think it is like what did what do
you think consciousness is well you see
how I I mean - it's going to fart I
think you know I know whether or the
answer isn't anything I just I just
think that this issue of having some
kind of quantum state which preserves
itself up to a certain level and the
microtubules at least suggested
something where you could isolate them
from the outside and the symmetry of
these things is important and there are
other structures I suspect it's not just
microtubules I suspect there are these
in classrooms these are molecules which
inhabit these synapses and and the thing
about these ones is that they're
incredibly symmetrical they're like a
soccer ball you know they're you have
these Pentagon's and hexagons and at
each vertex you've got a protein is
called a Triskelion and they joined
themselves along the edges of the
pattern of the soccer ball okay but it's
just the it's just a substance made of
these proteins and what are they doing
hanging around in the synapses I know
but the symmetry has a key role as a
thing called the yarn teller effect in
quantum mechanics which tells you that
when you have a highly symmetrical
structure like that then there can be a
big gap between the lowest energy level
and the next one and there can be
information in this lowest energy level
which can be shielded from the higher
energy levels so this is a sort of
suggestion that some kind of quantum
phenomenon is going on in a serious way
and there's a lot to understand there I
mean synapses themselves the kind of
strange things you might think if you
were going to build a brain why don't
you just solder the wires together at
the connections you see what are you
doing having this thing with all the
chemist chemicals transferring this
information you know I don't know but
it's something very needed for my the
system and it's all tied up with these
Clarins there and
and decide to skeleton structures which
microtubules are one of the main
constituents so you see I don't know
that there's a lot to learn I'm sure so
it seems like there's a bunch of
different factors there's the biological
understanding of the brain itself yeah
and then there's the understanding of
the actual nature of cells and of
reality itself this is being more
illuminated by science with every new
discovery and we're getting a better
understanding deeper and deeper as to
their very nature of matter and of these
structures themselves I think it is
getting deep into the end of the way the
physical world operates and things that
we don't understand about it just yet
yes I mean the biology is one side of it
you know coming as an outsider I get
struck by certain things I mean quite
familiar with the fact that the right
side of the cerebrum controls the left
hand and the left hand the right hand
but then you look at this and it's not
just that what about the soles of your
feet right at the top what about your
eyes the the signals right at the back
hmm you think this is the most
ridiculous construction you've gone to
the worst possible place yes there must
be a reason and the cerebellum is
different go cerebellum it's the left
side controls the left side and the
right side the right side so there's
something going on which involves these
signals going having to cross each other
or whatever it is I don't know well we'd
like to think that there's a reason but
then we look at other biological
life-forms and they look kind of
preposterous like a platypus for
instance what is that is that an
experiment is that a prototype that just
ran wild well I guess you got to think
of it in terms of natural selection so
yeah I guess the circumstances there I
don't know yeah in Australia wherever
you find it must be specific we got I
guess the a lot of that was because they
were isolated from from the rest of the
so you get sort of strange animals in
Australia and in New Zealand where
a lot of isolation from from the rest of
the evolution so they did their own
thing there
yeah marsupials yes yeah just intriguing
what this the the phrase quantum is
another one that's fraught with whoo
indeed right and some people like Deepak
Chopra and the like they love to use
that word because as soon as you use
that word you can kind of get away with
almost anything after it's just yes I
have to say I have quantum mechanics is
a strange thing and I saw the blame it
for certain things I don't want to be
unfair I'm not saying yes I blame it it
gives some people of the impression okay
the fact your theory doesn't make any
sense that's nothing against it you've
said crazy things quite a McCants is
crazy so why don't you accept some other
crazy theory of course quantum mechanics
has the virtue that it does agree with
an awful lot of experiments he gives you
a huge insight sense of things that one
didn't have before so just the fact that
it's crazy isn't enough to to make to
make it something you should study
seriously well well it's very very
difficult to understand even for people
who study it yes indeed so for someone
like myself I'm trying to pay attention
to this without devoting my entire life
to it yeah and it gets it becomes a big
problem because there's two III in one
of my books I tried to explain there are
actually two mysteries in quantum
mechanics and they get muddled one of
them is the whole subject is pretty
crazy
yes but it's coherent and it makes sense
and if you study it properly and you say
okay but that makes sense and this
includes things like non-local effects
where you can have two things
now even thousands of kilometers apart
and you can see these quantum
entanglement effects yes they still in
some sense connected with each other
even though they're that far apart which
is pretty amazing that's baffling that's
baffling but that's part of the
comprehensive or particle yeah it's
muddied up because there's the other
part which has to do is this collapse of
the wavefunction and standard quantum
mechanics really doesn't make sense
but people get them muddled in my view
you think because this doesn't make
sense and doesn't mean well it's all but
crazy and so anything crazy is up for
grabs but it seems to me that quantum
mechanics the things which are crazy and
they do hang together and the theory
works and you understand that that's
fine but the things which involve the
collapse of the wavefunction that's not
fine because we don't have the right
theory yet that's why it doesn't make
logical sense because it's not the right
theory yet that's my view I mean I'm a
minority in saying this most people who
study the foundations of quantum
mechanics say well we haven't got the
right interpretation right yet we we
have to think when it means and so on
they don't think well hmm maybe it's not
quite right maybe there's something when
this effects get big enough something
else comes in and we need a new insights
a new theory
so that's what I think now in something
like superposition where something can
be both still and in motion at the same
time as soon as you say that yeah to the
common person like myself my brain
glazes over and my eyebrows raise up and
I go okay what is and then you're
talking about entanglement things
hundreds of thousands of kilometers
apart that are somehow or another
interacting with each other in a way
that we don't totally understand or we
don't have a theory that absolutely
explains in a concrete way well it does
as long as you don't get to the
measurement measurement the entanglement
part is pretty well understood but the
measurement the measurement part is not
me see the the puzzles about the
entanglement is when you come to the
measurement you make a measurement over
here and the measurement over there and
they can be well had now fast meters
apart right the record was only a
hundred and forty three or something a
little while ago Wow but it's it's a
long time a long distance but there's
finally any movement of material so the
things that see in the scheme I have
which involves the collapse of the
wavefunction involves a certain amount
of displacement of mass now if it's just
photons that's light and modern these
experiments tend to be just right then
there's no mass displacement in the
state and so sure what quantum mechanics
says is fine by me
okay it is hard to get your mind around
and I certainly agree that but it's
logical what's not logical comes apart
but when you worry about the measurement
issue in the collapse of the
wavefunction and poor old Schrodinger
was very upset by this quite right yes
now when you discuss consciousness and
the mystery of consciousness and then
you take into account some of these
characteristics that are being displayed
in the quantum world do you think that
perhaps some of them are interchangeable
or similar to consciousness itself that
there is some sort of a connection that
human beings share and some some strange
unique and miss or not not understood
way yet I think one has to be careful
about these things and sometimes do well
even Niels Bohr who's one of the
founders of these ideas and he tried to
make a philosophy out of quantum
mechanics and you know what you call it
so complementarity and so I think that's
going a bit far I don't really see
because there's no evidence for it I
don't think so I think it's a bit
misleading that one you can see
analogies between things but I don't see
for myself but that should be taken much
further than that
but I you know maybe there's more there
but you're open to the possibility
should new information be yeah yeah I
mean if it comes to things like you know
when people talk about the entanglements
and things quantum states can spread to
long distances doesn't mean that human
beings Minds gonna stretch to long
distances and so on so these people will
raise questions like that I don't think
so myself I think that's that's pretty
far-fetched but you you know you might
worry well it could it be that there's
some quantum state which is shared
between different individuals it's hard
to see that could be unless they were
well I mean if they're identical twins I
suppose they were once one cell at one
time but you'd have to preserve that
information all the way through and I
just don't see how that could have
so I'm not a fan of trying to use
quantum ideas sort of directly in say
human behavior or something I think the
you know those analogies are pretty
far-fetched partly because the sort of
mathematics you use in quantum mechanics
is very specific to quantum mechanics
and doesn't really apply to macroscopic
behavior as far as I can see is this
something that is that your ax asked
about most often you mean in my research
all together or just common people like
myself it's only one of them but you see
it's slightly misleading when you're
thinking about what my interests are
because I had this as I say the I
explained more or less the history of my
ideas they only did write a book or at
least another one after that too
in fact I guess I've written three books
about that other one was taken down
lectures so on but it's not what I do
mainly right main research is is his own
cosmology well thinking there's this
area called twister theory but
necessarily going to that but it's meant
to be foundational quantum around a
tional physics not necessary but general
relativity I mean I guess the work I did
originally was people paid attention to
is in general relativity in black holes
what a black hole is why we have the
idea that they're there at all that sort
of thing I worked on that at one point
cosmology as a whole is one of the most
terrifying concepts to me because I just
when I start thinking about the size and
scale of everything I get to a certain
point and my brain just shuts off
there's not enough juice well it's
pretty huge when this has to think on a
pretty huge scale but it's like so many
things you it looks sort of
mind-boggling at first and then when you
get used to the idea you can sort of
play around with the ideas and maybe
forget how mine bothering it should be I
was watching a documentary on
supermassive black holes and they were
discussing how the size of this is I
don't know if this is still a
current theory this documentary was a
few years old but they were saying that
the there's a supermassive black hole
inside of every galaxy that's 1/2 of 1%
of the mass of the entire galaxy and
that they there's that one of the
theories was that inside the
supermassive black holes could be an
entirely different universe with
hundreds of billions of galaxies each
with their own black holes and then it's
infinite well you see I have a fairly an
idea which I think the mainstream does
still regard there's a bit crazy but not
like that I don't think you're going to
have much fun inside a black hole
nobody's in there not much well you
could have a really big black hole and
there's a lot of time in there a really
big one if you if you were in this
spaceship you could you could have a few
parties before you yes but I'm not sure
I recommend it no yeah I mean black
holes are remarkable enough and but I
mean the thing I did which was in well
1964 in the published in 65 wished to
show that black holes but I'm using a
terminology it wasn't around at that
time that the black holes clattered it
was cut gravitational collapse you see
the this the history went back to
originally I guess Chandra Sekhar Indian
scientists when he was not quite 20 I
think I can't remember in 19 or 20 and
he was going to England to study physics
astronomy and so on and he worked on
this problem about what holes white
dwarfs apart these are these very
massive stars the companion of Sirius
Sirius is a white dwarf and he was doing
calculations to find out whether they
but the interior is a very particular
structure structure of matter and he
came to the conclusions if they had a
bigger mass than a certain amount which
is about bit less than one and a half
times the sun's mass they wouldn't be
able to hold themselves apart and so
they would collapse and he didn't
speculate on what didn't happen he just
one is list there was some very modest
comment he made his one we
left speculating on possibilities or
something but then that was in the 1930s
I guess around about 1930 and much later
just before the war sigma-1 1913 that
way I see a bit later I guess 1939 there
was a paper by Oppenheimer of atomic
bomb fame and Schneider which is a
student of his department Snyder and
they produced a model which was a
solution of the Einstein equations which
describes a cloud of dust which
collapses and becomes what we now call a
black hole so this was the first clear
picture of collapse to a black hole now
in their picture they made two huge
assumptions well one of them is thus the
material that means it didn't have any
pressure and so you could imagine and
when it gets close to itself it might
push away if it had pressure and isn't
in any way but this was just dust that
was one thing but more important that
the model was exactly symmetrical so it
was just very clear symmetrical all a
matter falling in the dust particles
would be focused right into the central
point and so it's not so hard to believe
that you get a singularity where the
density goes infinite the curvatures go
infinite and your equations go crazy so
at that point when the dust reaches the
middle point okay it's not so surprising
because it's a very contrived situation
so I think a lot of people thought well
perhaps we shouldn't take it seriously
I think they weren't sure but then there
was a paper by two Russians Cooke
kaletnik Lifshitz and Kalashnikov and
they seemed to have proved that you
didn't get singularities in the general
case that somehow it would swirl around
and swish out again you see so that was
the possibility and then there was this
discovery I think in 1962 when Martin
Schmidt Dutch astronomer okay Dutch
American I think he where he was living
there at the time I don't remember but
he observed what became what we call the
the first quasar so this was an object
which was
radiating an awful amount of energy far
more than an entire galaxy but it seemed
to be a very small thing it couldn't be
much bigger than the size of the solar
system if even that big because it
variations and brightness indicated that
the speed of light could size of it had
to be comparable with the speed at which
the variations in in you know in
brightness came about so it seemed to be
an object that was enormous ly energetic
producing more energy than the whole
galaxy and varying with such a degree
that it must be fairly small and this
raised the question of whether it was
small enough to be what we now call a
black hole in other words it there's a
thing called the Schwarzschild radius
which what was the man who first
discovered the solutions of Einstein's
equations which described this spherical
body but he didn't extrapolate inwards
to what's called this horizon we call it
a rice and now it used to be called the
Schwarzschild singularity and people
began to realize that it wasn't really a
singularity it's more something you
could imagine falling through I guess it
was the metro who first made clear that
clear but not many people paid attention
but that was the idea of a black hole
and it looked then is that these quasar
ass could be having some black hole in
the middle of them and I remember John
Wheeler who was at Princeton then very
distinguished scientists and he got way
worried about these things and he talked
to me and he were right about it and do
we believe is there a singularity in the
middle do we believe Lifshitz Nick
latnok Offutt they sort of swirl round
abouts at what are we supposed to think
so I started thinking about this problem
and since at that time well you see
either people when you want to solve the
Einstein equations either you make a lot
of assumptions and it's a symmetrical
light like thee Oppenheimer schneider
model you assume it's got very special
properties and then you can maybe solve
the equations but only very very special
cases and the computers weren't powerful
enough to tell you very much about what
happened so I started thinking about
this problem
and realizing that I attempt to think
about it in a different way
and so I used ideas which both ideas
from topology and things like that to
show that there had to be a singularity
in the middle provided that the collapse
had reached a certain point of no return
I guess to get some idea of it I don't
know it's not too misleading there's a
mathematical theorem cover the hairy dog
theorem hairy dog theorem yes I mean ssf
ocular terminology but you think of a
something which is topologically a
sphere that means you see you imagine a
dog shape but you could sort of move it
around with a piece of plasticine until
it looked like a sphere it doesn't have
holes in it okay forget about this
digestive system you see you're thinking
about the surface outside and then
you're out the problem is you try to
comb the hair on the dog all the way
around and the theorem says there's got
to be somewhere where the hair doesn't
lie flat and you try it on the sphere
there's got to be a point where where
the hair makes a kind of singular point
so it's a bit like that you have no idea
where the singularity is but you know
from general topological reasons that
there's got to be one somewhere and that
was the sort of argument that I produced
and I guess a lot of people had a little
bit of trouble because they'd never seen
this kind of argument and a lot of
people picked up on it and particular
Stephen Hawking and it became for a
while a lot of many people working on it
I guess it's not so popular now because
they probably would run out of theorems
the idea of a singularity like is when
you see something like a quasar or the
the the the center of a galaxy nam and
we were talking about a black hole when
you say a singularity what exactly are
you do you mean by that with a normal
expectation is that you have a place
like in the middle of the open animus
neither dustcloud that a point there
where the density becomes infinite and
so the curvature of space-time
infinite so you have a place for the
equations and run away and they go to
infinity and you say well something's
gone wrong but maybe initially it was in
these very symmetrical cases but but you
could show by these indirect arguments
that somewhere something's got to go
wrong you can't continue the equations
of Einstein and they get stuck right in
that place where they go infinite Dora
what in detail happens the theorems
don't tell you they just say that
something goes wrong and that's what we
call a singularity and if a black hole
is larger or smaller the singularity
remains constant it remains in in there
it remains in there but it's not
measurable in terms of its actual size
so whether you could measure its size
very well because its size that's a
that's an intriguing question you might
say the size has gone to zero but it
could be quite complicated irregular not
like the original opera no Messiah at
one we saw something even then the point
is the wrong point of view but let's not
go into that no there is something about
the structure of these things you can
say they're not all the same no then the
singularities and all the same but the
black holes are not all the same they're
not all the same but they this one of
the strange things about black holes is
that if you let them settle down they're
not all the same to begin with but
they're not many different things they
can settle into they can have rotation
they can have a certain mass and the
mass translates into the size of a
diameter of the hole and you've also got
rotation so they can rotate and these
are hard shell found the non rotating
ones and it was Roy Kerr an Australian
who first produced the solution for a
rotating black hole rotating yes a
rotating one but then you see the
remarkable thing is that's what they
settled down to so they're good theorems
which tell you that the general black
hole to be very complicated fairly
rapidly will settle down and become one
of these curse Aleutians the rotating
black hole
I remember when I first saw that
documentary I saw the the one they were
discussing the the shape of these
galaxies and that the center of it had
this supermassive black hole that was
slowly devouring the galaxy yeah I mean
it's it is an unbelievably beautiful yet
simultaneously terrifying idea is that
there's this yes
infinite power in the center of infinite
mass that's absorbing slowly but surely
everything around it yes but it's not
infinite mass the mass is quite
well-defined and it's not infinite but
yeah I was a good question I mean if you
wait forever
how much of the mass actually gets
swallowed by the mine hole you see I
think the pictures to think not just a
one galaxy but a cluster mmm you see our
galaxy has this 4 million solar mass
black hole and we are on a collision
course with the Andromeda galaxy and I
don't know how long but many but some
time in the future yes the black holes
will probably spiral into each other and
there'll be one big one
so it's definable mass but in infinite
density and that this point which were
they were speculating that this could
possibly in the center of the
supermassive black holes yeah if you
could go through that there would be
another universe well yes that's all
nice speculation it's a nice romantic
thought is it more whoo I'm afraid so so
good though yes I know well it's a shame
for science fiction yeah makes a nice
little it's interesting that we try to
make things more complicated than they
are because they're so complicated as it
is like dark matter for instance it
boggles the mind that we don't really
totally understand what 90 plus percent
well that's a good question yeah what is
that stuff well you want me to tell you
my theory yes please well you see it's
part of a story which I don't know about
15 years ago I must have years a passing
by I can't remember how long ago huh so
I had this idea you see the universe as
a whole is expanding now early in the
this century don't ask me dates again
some people by observing super not
supernovae saw exploding stars very very
far away
they found out that the universe is
actually accelerating in its expansion
and some people found this very
mysterious on the other hand it's in all
the cosmology books because there is
that expectation you see in 1915 I sign
produced his general theory in 1917 he
introduced what's called the
cosmological constant so you think of a
it was called lambda you think of a
v-shape turned upside down which is
remember and he introduced this term for
the wrong reason because at that time
people weren't there was some indication
in the universe was expanding but not
very clear and Einstein
I guess maybe didn't know or didn't
believe it and this the couple's
observations hadn't yet come to make a
convincing case of the expansion so I
thought well maybe the universe is
static it's kind of philosophically nice
to think that it's sitting there all the
time and he couldn't make it do that so
he had to introduce this term called the
cosmological constant and he did that
and then not while very much longer
after this Hubble showed that the
universe does seem to be expanding and
Einstein regarded this lambda term as
his biggest blunder which is an irony
because it turns out that this term is
probably the explanation for the
expansion of the universe we now see so
it's what people call dark energy I
don't like the term very much because
it's neither dark nor proper energy in
any clear sense but still don't listen
twerp out that right it would so it's
it's an odd term yes I think so
it's a little confusing because it's
dark matter as well which is quite
different you know she must yeah I'm
confused with the dark energy as it's
called or the cosmological constant
which as far as we can tell it is
completely consistent with the
observations it's a positive number very
small but it seems to be producing this
expansion
and I'm quite happy with that viewpoint
because it leads to a picture which I've
been trying to plug for a while now
maybe up to 15 years I can't remember
the idea yes it's hard to explain but
let me try it came about because I was
worrying about the remote future and I
was thinking okay when these black holes
are on this wall I love all the stars
and they're just sitting around and
what's the most next exciting thing
happening well the Hawking of apparation
they're going to radiate away Stephen
Hawking showed that black holes had this
temperature extremely cold
how many of these enormous ones are
absurdly cold much colder than anything
made on the earth and but when the
universe expands and expands and expands
it gets colder than the black holes and
so those black holes get become the
hottest hottest things around and so
they radiate away very very slowly this
Hawking radiation and that carries
energy and so they shrink and shrink and
they shrink and finally they disappear
with a pop my set pop is probably a
pretty big explosion but that not that
big from a cosmological that's the
physical scale so they disappear well it
may be you've been pretty boring when
you're sitting around waiting for the
black hole to go pop but afterwards
that's really boring so this was a
picture I thought of being rather
depressed by thinking that's that's our
that fate you see the fate of all the
interesting things happening ultimate
fate is this unbelievably boring final
state okay this is an emotional argument
but give me a bit of leeway okay so I
began to think well it's not going to be
us who are going to be bored because
we're not gonna be around that the main
things that look me around will be
photons and it's pretty hard to borrow
Photon for two very good reasons one is
it probably doesn't have conscious
experiences now that's sure so but the
other is more of a science point that
that they don't measure time because a
photon has no mass it travels at the
speed of light
but the way relativity works it means
that clocks stopped if you like so if it
had experiences it but the moment of its
creation would be one moment and the
next moment would be infinity and so
they just zip out to infinity without
noticing a thing now you see I'd been
doing work on this kind of thing
thinking more about gravitational
radiation and how you measure its energy
and things like that and it was a very
useful picture to squash down infinity a
useful thing to think about here if
you've seen these pictures by the Dutch
artist MC Escher mmm and there are those
which are called circle limits and
there's a very famous one with angels
and devils interlocking and they get all
crowded up onto the edge now what you've
got to think about is that this is a
kind of geometry called hyperbolic
geometry and the angels and devils live
in that geometry and the ones right
close to the edge think they're the same
size and same shape as the ones in the
middle oh yeah and so the idea is that
if you look at it from the angels and
devils point of view that's infinity
that boundary but from our point of view
we can look at it and we have what's
called a conformal map that picture is a
conformal map what that means is that
little shapes are quite consistently
drawn but there can be big or small and
you don't care about whether there be or
this more as small shapes are accurate
or angles if you like a correctly drawn
so it's what's called a conformal map
and that conformal map describes
infinity now you can do the same thing
to the universe but I said do it I mean
you can imagine hitting them with this
remote future you can squash it down
just like in the Escher picture to a
finite boundary and as far as the things
with no mass they don't have a way of
measuring how big or small it is the
Maxwell equations don't know the scales
they don't care it's that work just as
well for small as for big and you can
stretch it in some place and squash it
somewhere else as long as the stretching
and squashing is isotropic so just as
much one way as the other way which
means more or less that you keep what I
call the light cone
there let's not go into details here but
it means that that if you have things
without mass the most particularly the
photons then that boundary is just like
anywhere else and the photons go zipping
up to it and so you might think they
gotta have somewhere to go okay well
that's a you don't have to think that
but that was the point of view I had the
photons need to need somewhere to enter
in a way but then where does it go but
then there's the other picture which is
the opposite then there's the Big Bang
now you can do a similar sort of trick
there which is stretching it out and
making it into a boundary and that can
be down to I played around with these
ideas for a long time and the standard
cosmology models you can do it with but
the more complicated cosmology models
you might have one which is very
complicated Big Bang the general ones
don't look like that at all so you need
a condition which tells you that the Big
Bang was a very special kind that it was
it's all tied up with this thing called
the second law of thermodynamics and it
all ties together with physics in a way
which perhaps we don't have time to talk
about but it seemed to me a really good
idea to have the condition on the Big
Bang that you could continue it in the
same way I should say the idea of doing
this was a former student of mine Paul
Todd who was called a good man
and he used this as continual conformal
continuation as a nice way of saying
what the condition is on the Big Bang to
give you what you want but that's a huge
condition but it nevertheless it's what
starts our universe off in in a very
special state which is what we live off
in a way it's the second law of
thermodynamics needs that to get going
anyway I don't know if you want to worry
about that but anyway the point was that
it looks as though it's a good condition
on the Big Bang but it also should be
conformally I like a boundary which if
you had no mass you wouldn't notice it
okay you've got particles with mass
running around near the Big Bang but as
you get closer and closer and closer the
energy goes up the temperature goes
zooming
zooming up the slipping around such a
speed that the energy of their motion is
much bigger than the equals mc-squared
mass Einsteins mass the energy in in the
mass is a certain amount but when they
get so hot you can forget about the mass
so they like photons behave like
particles without mass and so they're
just interested in the conformal
geometry so the crazy idea I had not
just only stretch out the Big Bang nice
washed on the Infinity but maybe our Big
Bang was a squash down infinity of a
previous Eon so I'm saying ariane began
with a big bang ended up with this
exponential expansion there was another
one before us there will be another one
after us there was another one before
that and so on so it's an infinite cycle
of Big Bang that's the picture and
constant expansion to the point where
there's no more energy and then somehow
or another a Big Bang comes out of that
yes that's right well that's the tricky
part that people have trouble with it's
universally accepted that the Big Bang
was an event there's no pretty well
universally theories that are attractive
I would say nothing terribly popular
there are certain ideas which say you
can continue into the before the Big
Bang Paul Steinhardt and what do they
think that was it's it's such things in
common with my model but it's not quite
the same and you see it still you see
there wasn't it right
not long after Einstein produces theory
and this Alexander Friedmann who was a
Russian mathematical physicist he
produced the first cousin cosmology
models and one of these was a one which
has sort of bounces it big bang it
expands out and then it contracts again
during these bounces in conduct so that
was one of his models the only trouble
is if you put irregularities into these
models you get black holes and these
black holes can Palmer Crooker I mean
incredible mess at the end and that
doesn't join onto a nice smooth Big Bang
the next one so you have trouble with
those months but still people take these
things seriously
and as I say Steinhardt and toric have a
model which is like that so these are
things were nice to think about my own
view is that they don't take into
account the the black hole problem which
is that my 1 gets rid of that because
the black holes all evaporate away by
Hawking evaporation hmm and so it forms
a model I used to give talks about this
feeling quite happy nobody would ever
prove it wrong so I can go on talking
away but I wasn't quite happy with that
I thought maybe you could see signals
coming through so I had one idea about
that but more recently and this is only
just this year I have two polish
colleagues
that's Christoph Meisner and Pavan
Yourofsky and there is a Korean who
works in New York called Daniel Ann and
we the four of us have a paper which I
think today or tomorrow will be the new
improved version of this paper should be
on the archive and this the title of the
paper is are we seeing Hawking points in
the CMB sky now what's a Hawking point
you see I talked about the black holes
sitting the previous Eon to our us
assuming it's more or less like ours
there will be black holes in clusters of
galaxies huge enormous ones swallowing
up pretty pretty well the whole cluster
and what happens to the energy in those
black holes well it goes out in Hawking
radiation it takes an age ages and ages
and ages maybe 10 to 100 year Google
years or something ages and ages but all
that energy in the picture comes out
basically in one point think of that
Asha picture and right at the very edge
you see there are novel lot of angels
and devils squashed together there so
that the entire radiation from that
single black hole will be squashed into
that little point now we're on the other
side what do we see well there will be a
big release of energy at that point and
that's what we call the Hawking point
and it spreads out you see what we see
in the Cosmic Microwave Background this
is radiation coming from all directions
and this radiation doesn't come from the
Big Bang exactly
it comes from 380,000 years after the
Big Bang so there's a sort of last
scattering surface where the photons
which are trying to get out
finally finally can escape and we see
them now
that spread out from the Hawking point
to what you see in the in a cosmic
microwave background in the last
scattering surface is something of the
diameter of about eight times the
diameter of the moon no bigger no
smaller
now you wouldn't see the whole thing
because our past cone where we what we
see cut across it we don't see the whole
thing but we see probably most of it so
you could imagine something from about
four to eight times the moon's diameter
which is a small region which is highly
energetic more energetic in the middle
and tapers off as you go to the edge and
we seem to see these things the analysis
that but the polls they have the
techniques and the actual analyzing the
data this is the Planck satellite data
whose done by Daniel an and then we look
at the data and we seem to see an effect
which see what you do is you we've got
only one universe that's what to
complain about so how do you know if
something's real or not where you make
zillions of fake universes and you
compare this with them there's a lot of
technique about how you do this but
Daniel first did a thousand of these
fakes and they were sort of two sizes of
these you look at these rings to see
whether the temperature goes out from
the outside to the middle and there were
two sizes both within this size that I'd
say about four degrees across the sky
and there was no evidence of them at all
in the simulation so this is a real
effect
okay then people were skeptical of this
for one reason or another so Daniel did
another well 10,000 altogether and you
occasionally there one or two which do
what two or three to be precise where
you see this effect in
simulations but if you work out the
probability that this is a real effect
you come up with a confidence level of
99.98% that this is a real effect so
we're waiting to see what people say
about this what are you thoughts on
multiverses well you see this is
different because this is what
sequential yeah so I don't call it a
multiverse they each influence the next
one and so they're not independent
worlds right but in the possibility of
independent yeah well you see there are
two reasons for believing multiverses
one of them is the quantum reason that
maybe will you have the Schrodinger's
dead cat in the live cat they're in
different worlds and they separate
universes I don't believe that argument
I don't think that's the right way to
look at quantum mechanics but many
people do and that suggests that you
might have these multiple universes and
some what's unattractive about that to
you it doesn't explain what we see so
you want a theory which explains the
world we see mm-hmm and the world we see
you get collapse the the state does and
to explain that well it's only because
we've drifted off into some world and
another version of ourselves is drifting
to another one and some see one and the
other city over and they're all in
superposition it doesn't explain why you
see one world in this kind of coherence
I mean lots of people try and there are
many attempts at this sort of thing it's
quite a widely held view and if you
believe quantum mechanics that the
collapse is not real and it doesn't
happen and all the alternatives the dead
cats and a live cat coexists in
different worlds that's the
interpretation that's a view I don't
think that I want I want an explanation
for the world we live in and you don't
see cast different worlds with cats and
well it's a long story
right I mean it's clearly it's a view
you can home to and if you don't want to
monkey with quantum mechanics it's where
you let so that's that's right that's
the alternative either you don't make a
single trying to change quantum
mechanics at all and then you are led to
this multi-world many many world picture
yeah I think it even doesn't make that
much sense so you gotta be careful about
it and that whether they are really like
different distinct worlds I don't think
it really my view is it doesn't really
work but let me not try and attack that
I think I have a different view which is
that the theory is not quite quite right
right and that there is something which
makes the the collapse into a physical
process and there's only one world now
the other many worlds view which is
comes from a different reason and that
is that there you see there seem to be
various accidents in well maybe one of
them being that the neutron is just
slightly more massive than the proton
that's one there are lots of other
accidents we see that if they were a
little different then life as we know it
couldn't happen hmm
and so how do you explain this well some
people say well all these universes with
different values of these constants or
coexist it's just we only see the one
that we're in because the numbers come
out right for us so that's what's
causing the throw poq argument mm-hmm
okay I can see the argument I don't like
it much
it's sort of I think we need a better
explanation for why the numbers of what
we see and so on but that's that that
one makes more sense to me than the
other one so so I think one can maybe
has to take that seriously but it's
certainly not the view I'm presenting
here with this picture it's for someone
like me it's so interesting to know that
there's still a considerable amount of
speculation yes oh yeah well it's it's
there's a lot of speculation but a lot
of it is pretty off the wall and a lot
of people think mine are off the wall I
see
okay I'm no man and so it's okay you
know decent things in the past but you
shouldn't trust this abuse now you see
so I guess that's what people think I
don't know but you see if it's just me I
could understand that right but I've got
these pose and
Armenian colleague who's done things on
this too and it can't be they were all
all off the rails I think there's
something out there and now with the
Hawking points there's something people
can really go out and look for and if
they don't see you and there's something
funny going on somewhere if they do see
them there's something else going funny
on which which they'll have to think of
another explanation unless it's my
explanation they'll have to think of a
different view from the current
inflation view which is in real trouble
with these observations as far as I can
see do you anticipate in any foreseeable
time the future a better understanding
of dark matter and dark energy or
perhaps a better definition of what
those things are
yeah we see I think my own current view
is that dark energy as it's called is
the cosmological constant now that's not
an explanation if you like because why
is it that good why is it the value it
has why is it there at all and there are
certainly questions about that which I
agree with dark matter I didn't go into
this but in this scheme of mine it has
to be there when I say it I mean that if
you want the equations to make sense
which cross over from our remote future
to the Big Bang of the next Eon you have
to have a creation of a dominant new
material which is scalar and as I said
it doesn't spin it's just ordinary
particles and but they only interact
gravitationally and that's what we see
but the theory that I'm putting forward
would make these things very massive
they're about what's called the Planck
mass I don't know exactly because
there's some freedom in this something
like the prank Planck mass which people
describe as the mass of a fleas I don't
quite know why they make it well but
that's about 10 to the minus 5 grams so
you're looking at a one hundred
thousandth of a gram
so it's sort of a an appreciable size
it's not you know it's not like basic
particles and physics measurable it's
the sort of measurable thing you could
imagine you you could get hit get hold
on in some way but that's huge for a
fundamental particle hmm so it's a it's
a wild idea from that point of view but
also they should decay and they should
decay into gravitational signals which
maybe could be seen by LIGO maybe have
been seen by Lego and thrown in the
rubbish bin because there'd be different
types of signals from what people would
expect I wouldn't like to put my money
anywhere there but I'm liking hoping
that these dark matter particles are the
ones that come from the theory that I'm
putting forward so that would be another
consequence of this particular point of
view and they've observed correctly from
wrong entire galaxies that they believe
that consist of dark matter there is let
me see if I remember what it is there
are some galaxies the other way around
which don't seem to have any dark matter
buzzing there are other galaxies which
have huge amounts that's probably what
you're referring to whether they were
only dark matter you'd have trouble
seeing them right because dark matter
after all it was just a measured thing
yes it may be I don't know that one it's
quite possible yeah I don't see why not
they just have to have some reason why
they clump together in this way you see
it's quite possible if galaxies collide
then when you see the stars tend to go
through so they would accompany with
they'd accompany the dark matter the the
dust and the galaxies tends to get stars
and stay where it is so if two collide
then you'd have a big pile of dust in
the middle but I think the dark matter
tends to carry on through with the stars
I don't know there may be some process
which could produce just islands of dark
matter I don't
when you discuss the cosmos maybe the
single most intriguing possibility to us
as human beings is what other
intelligent life if any is out there and
how interesting is that to you because
you spend so much time studying the
fundamental particles of the universe
itself how interested are you and the
possibility of other intelligent life
forms or have you just like put that out
into the it's just so ridiculously
unlikely or so far away from us that
we're probably never going to make
contact well you see it's not so there's
a SETI program looking at to see where
they can see signals from distant
civilizations the problem there from my
perspective is that although they might
be out there they've got to have had a
real head start on us
before you would see them horizon they
might have done so but then I don't know
you see actually why he goes to John
who's my Armenian colleague and who
looked also for these ring shaped things
and looked at them in a different way
from the Polish people but we seem to
have seen something there but we wrote a
paper in which we speculated on beings
from the previous eon communicating with
us and the advantage there is that
you're looking at the really advanced
civilizations very as you see billions
of years ago that they their universe
disappeared and then had to come back to
a big bang stay the signals could come
through and somehow or another those
signals remain it's conceivable I agree
it's pretty far-fetched but you know
so-yeon how many billions of years are
you talking about like that the Big Bang
was 14 billion yes but you see that's
way way at the beginning in a sense or
it's 3/4 of the way through in another
sense it depends how you draw the
pictures right in a sense of
interestingness or in the conformal
picture we are already three quarters of
the way through so 14 billion to now so
we have counted
you see the trouble is it's this ochite
she the year count it's as much as you
like it depends on on on something else
the mass has to fade out and how you
measure time is it becomes problematic
and it's either infinity you see which
isn't much use or you might have a
different definitions of time which
depend on what particle you're using
it's your clocks and things like that so
are you essentially saying that it's
entirely possible that we are the
farthest in terms of our technological
achievement and our understanding of the
universe itself it's possible that we're
at the front of the line though there
might be some other intelligent life
forms in the universe but they might be
behind us well there would have been I'm
not saying they got through you say well
maybe they have techniques for getting
through but that's that's a bit harder
to imagine but maybe information from
them to get through it may attack you
mean from the previous yes yes oh they
might have got through like somehow
another survived yes but it would have
to be in the form of photons or
something yeah no you could it's not I'm
talking about ridiculous right
speculation
so encoding information yes in the
photons yes yes Wow
it's conceivable sure now I don't want
to say that I see it happening or
anything but it's not out of the
question that they could develop some
technology which would get information
which might be them in some sense across
in the form of photons but you're not
optimistic about current intelligent
life somewhere in the universe not too
optimistic just because well maybe it
took us a long time to get going because
the dinosaurs were there for a while and
somebody might have got in there earlier
and they're different planets and they
could have got there quite ahead of us
it's conceivable I'm not gonna rule it
out I just not terribly optimistic about
it no I think it's worth doing it's
worth looking yes but it's not something
that you're really not serious but I'm
expecting it's not so much I'd be
curious certainly then I'm not expecting
it I guess is it just because of the
overall lack of real evidence and it's
just not an attractive thank you to
pursue it's quite attractive
it's shirts right you know I've just
been doing other things and I don't know
there's enough to do in the world I
haven't really come to terms that vary
hugely so I know there's this activity
and I'd be interested to see if any kind
of you know if this there was this thing
that came past that some people
speculated it was a scent they're buying
different intelligence which came quite
close in our solar system
oh that was that strange-looking yes
that's right yeah I mean I don't see any
real reason to believe it's a alien was
it because of the way it was traveling
that was the yeah the idea was something
about it
serious people did suggest it might be
something sent by an alien civilization
it's worth you know may connect with it
in some way
but I don't know I guess it's too far
away now well it's another thing that's
so uniquely fascinating for us the
concept of saying of another of another
life-form out there oh sure yes no you
see there lots of things I'm interested
in the ones I talked to you about and
perhaps though some of the main ones
although the consciousness one is I'm
glad that there are people doing it and
you see this is one of the things
there's this institute that's that's
being created using my name and James
Tague has involved for this started it
and I'm quite a nice MIT and worried
about having my name attached to this
human I didn't know much about it but it
seems to me a really important thing
where you can which the deliberate
purpose of it is to develop ideas which
are makes sense but are not mainstream
hmm and one of these was the
consciousness thing so you know Stuart
Hameroff is doing it but it's not a
activity that's being taken part of
people researching it in in detail in
other parts of the world so to have a
place which supports that kind of thing
is great and I think that's very good
but when I heard about it first I
thought well most of my interests
you're on the physics side and not so
much in biology which I'm pretty
ignorant about and there are lots of
ideas on that side not just the
cosmology but ideas and building
experiments which might detect the
collapse of the wavefunction and one
idea is to look at bose-einstein
condensates see I have a colleague
that's Yvette Fuentes who I knew about
and who had these ideas of how to use
bose-einstein condensates to detect
gravitational waves and that's also very
you know an under mainstream way of
looking at it but a very clever idea and
the bose-einstein condensates because
that's so quantum mechanical and they
are so cold they're almost virtually
absolute zero and they can keep external
disturbances from causing problems and
you can manipulate them in ways to make
them in two places at once
people have done this kind of thing and
so it might well be a good way of
testing me when the Schrodinger cat
thing with whether state reduction or
the collapse of wave function is a
phenomenon that which is the kind which
I hope might be like gravitational
effect and in that case if it is then
that would be relevant to the
consciousness problem so all these
things tied together in various ways and
so the hope was that these things which
are you know could be supported and I
thought it was important because there's
always the danger of such an institute
being regarded as flaky but yeah he was
doing weird things who cares
so the important point from my
perspective is that they should be
things which can be and either now
immediately tested experimentally or
with a few years so the things which are
really you can get your hold on you can
get and test them and see whether
they're right or not so this would be a
protection against thinking well these
these are great crazy ideas that are
being pursued they have to be ideas
which are capable of tests and have a
reasonable chance of
of showing evidence in favor in their
favor or guests you know whichever would
be interesting and important to know so
from the outside looking in to me it's
so fascinating to watch intellectuals as
you said like yourself that are bouncing
these ideas around that are possible but
are not mainstream and it seems to me
that it's a precarious sort of tightrope
walk like you don't want to say anything
ridiculous that's not true it's what you
would love to say something that seems
to be ridiculous but turns out to be in
fact accurate and provable yes so that
was this dance I absolutely agree yes
that's absolutely right and of course
you've got to play with ideas which are
on the sort of edge of what we know
otherwise you're stuck with what we know
and these things will simply get
channeled on the old roots and and you
need to be able to break break free of
those from time to time but not in a way
which is too crazy to be examined to see
whether there is truth in these ideas or
not because of the cinco nation that
people have to go towards wu or towards
crazy ideas it is important for the
skepticism right it is important for the
scrutiny yes oh absolutely
so Israel is real danger in that ledge I
agree well you see there's a strange
kind of problem you see because with
these observations I'm not about there
Hawking points which are just described
but the earlier ones about black hole
collisions and my Armenian colleague and
I had written a couple of papers on this
and we hadn't got any response at all
and the Polish people and they'd written
papers two of them accepted by
respectable journals and Christophe
asked me know what kind of response you
got I say zero so I seem what about you
how about what response your zero so
this is kind of spooky you see all right
we've got these things out there in the
literature refereed excepted
publications and instead of people you
know saying this is a load of nonsense
look it doesn't make any sense for this
reason and this disagrees with this
observation and so and that was fine if
I see that I might be unhappy with it
but it you've got somebody to work on
you say oh I see what's wrong something
needs money
that doesn't explain properly that's
what's needed or yes no you you're right
I put it abandon this idea all these
things come from criticisms and to have
absolutely no tension whatsoever paid to
these papers something I find spooky why
do you think there's no attention paid I
don't know I don't really know I mean
one of the things is there's so much
information and that people don't have
time they've got run projects and they
don't want to pay attention and they
think it looks crazy because it's too
much outside the picture of the world
that they have and I think a lot of its
that and they maybe say well look I've
been thinking I'm you know guy now and I
maybe I did good things in the past but
maybe I've gone a bit off the rails but
I think that you know I've got
colleagues it's not just me right
and these respected people who work on
these things too so I don't think that
can be a complete explanation maybe it's
part of it but the sheer volume of
papers that are published it's got to be
impossible to keep up with although I
think that's a big part of the trouble
because there are other ideas which
which to me look crazy and other people
don't look any it as crazy as my ideas
you see so maybe this why a lot of them
have more attention page than the ones
we actually I'm curious to know whether
the Hawking points will take off or not
well I'm so happy there's people like
you doing this kind of work and then
someone condensing it down to an
understandable point that someone like
me can absorb and just try to get a
better picture of this insane reality
that we're living in yeah but it's
pretty weird you're right and it seems
like the more I talk to people like
yourself and the more you study this it
doesn't get less weird it gets more
weird yes I think that's right well I
don't know with more information it
seems to be more fantastic there's
certainly a lot of very weird things but
the point about them is that they gotta
make sense yes mathematical sense
they've gotta agree with observational
facts
and that rules out a lot of the really
weird ones it does but even the ones
that are observable and do adhere to the
facts they're so fantastic it's so the
reality this is one of the things that's
most frustrating about people's
inclination to lean towards the whoo and
I've been guilty of it myself and so
attractive yeah but what's frustrating
about it is that provable reality is so
titanically bizarre that's true no I
agree that it's almost like why bother
with the whoo well reality is you make a
very good point it move in and of itself
you're absolutely right no it's very
very strange in quantum mechanics in so
many ways is but you see you got a I
think there's a little bit of a danger
of separating the things which are well
first of all it could be just wrong
secondly there are things which do
require quantum mechanics to be changed
in some way and there be other ones
which are within quantum mechanics are
just weird and that's absolutely true
there are these things which which I
believe have to be true as much as the
dyed-in-the-wool quantum mechanics
people who follow the party lines and so
on yeah I mean these quantum
entanglements the fact that things can
be whatever it is couple of hours and
kilometers separated and yet know each
other in a way you can't explain that
they're separate individuals they behave
as though they're one but called an
entangled state and you can make
experiments which reveal that I mean it
was Sir John Bell who was an Irish
theoretical physicist who who really
made made all this very clear that these
things are real manifestations of the
peculiarity of quantum mechanics and
really out there in the world was it JD
s Haldane that said the world is not
only queer then you suppose it's queer
than you can suppose that's right that's
what this is right is that kind of thing
listen sir thank you for your time a
real
appreciate it I really appreciate
talking to you and thank you for all
your work and your your contribution to
our understanding of what we're looking
at here I hope it helps a bit it helps a
lot I appreciate you very much thank you
thank you sir
[Music]